DistoX2 Calibration Manual
Leica Disto X310 based DistoX
2013/12/20

Why a Calibration?
The DistoX consists of three magnetic field sensors and three accelerometers. They allow to
determine the precise orientation of the device in space and the direction relative to the earth
magnetic field. Due to manufacturing tolerances and external influences, such a system
inevitably reveals certain errors. Among them are:
- Offset and gain errors of the sensors.
- Sensors mounted under incorrect angles.
- Angular errors between the sensors and the Laser beam.
- Influences of metal parts (in particular the battery) on the magnetic field.
Fortunately all these errors can be eliminated relatively easily by a bunch of calibration
measurements and the corrections calculated from them. This calibration process has to be
done on a readily built device. It should be repeated regularly to compensate drift and aging
effects.

Requirements
The following prerequisites must be fulfilled:
- The device must be readily built and working.
- The PocketTopo Program must be running (on a PC or PDA)
- There has to be a working Bluetooth connection to the device.
IMPORTANT:
The calibration measurements must be done in an undisturbed magnetic environment. It is
practically impossible to do a precise calibration in a house or near buildings. Even metal
screws in wooden constructions have an influence! The best environment is either a cave or a
forest.
A calibrated reference stretch is NOT needed!

Procedure
For a full calibration the following steps should be done:
1) Start the PocketTopo program.
2) If not already done, set the Bluetooth port under "Menu:Options:Port".
3) Use "Menu:Calibration..." to start the calibration application.
4) Use “Menu:Start” on the calibration screen to put the Disto into calibration mode. The
display of the Disto shows “CAL” in the first line.
5) Execute the calibration measurements (see below).
6) Transfer the results to the application. This starts automatically when a connection to the
Disto is set up. The results are shown in a chart on the screen.
7) Use "Menu:Stop" to leave the calibration mode on the device.

8) Use "Evaluate" to analyze the calibration. The third value given in the lower part of the
screen is a measure of quality. It should be smaller than 0.5.
9) Use "Menu:Update" to transfer the calculated calibration coefficient to the Disto.
10) As a quick check measure an arbitrary sketch four times with for different orientations of
the device (display up, right, down, and left). The values shown should be consistent to a
few tenth of a degree.

Calibration Measurements
The recommended sequence of measurements consists of 56 shots in 14 distinct directions.
Each direction is measured four times with different orientations of the device (display up,
right, down, and left). To get a good distribution of the directions, it is best to imagine being
in the center of a large cube. The first six directions are taken to the middle of the six faces,
that means four of them are horizontal and two are vertical (up and down). The remaining
directions are taken to the 8 vertices of the cube. The precise directions are not important as
long as they are reasonably spread.
To correct a potential error between the Laser and the sensors, a few directed measurements
are needed. Therefore, for the first four (horizontal) directions, the four measurements
(display up, right, down, and left) made in each case are measured precisely in the same
direction. This can easily be done between two points marked for instance on two trees or
cave walls.
In summary, you have to measure 4 precise directions with 4 measurements each and then
another 40 measurements in 10 directions without bearing. The precise number, direction, and
sequence of these remaining measurements are not important. However, it is still
recommended to use a target point and to take some time for each measurement to allow the
reading to stabilize.
The device may be switched on and off any time in calibration mode without data loss. So the
values can be acquired in the field and analyzed at home.

DistoX Operation in Calibration Mode
The handling of the Disto is essentially the same as usual. The display shows “CAL” in the
first line to indicate the calibration mode. The second line contains a counter which reflects
the number of measurements already made.
Instead of getting the directional angles from the sensor values, the values itself are saved in
calibration mode. The sensor values can be retrieved after each measurement with the
SMART key.
Calibration mode can be switched on or off on the device by pressing CLR and SMART for 2
seconds.

The 56 Measurements

And so on for the remaining seven cube vertices.

